Hey there and welcome to Soul Church.
Our prayer is that this message encourages you wherever you may be in life.
We've been hearing so many stories about what God is doing in people's lives and we'd love to hear yours.
So take a second and send your story to stories at soulchurch.com.
Thanks again for joining us today and we hope that you enjoy the message.
God bless.
We've got an incredible couple of us this weekend.
Pete and Sammy, Greg.
and some of you are familiar with Pete and Sammy, and they've been running the 24-7 prayer rooms across the world in over 200 nations of the world.
26 years ago, God gave them a vision to have 24-7 prayer around the clock around the world.
And that's happening now.
And Pete and Sammy, we want you to know we love you.
It's taken me five years to get you on this stage, but we're grateful you said, yeah.
He said, yes, five years ago, we just couldn't get a date.
But Pete, thank you, mate.
Pete's on it just before you clap.
This guy has been a huge, huge blessing to our church behind the scenes and we're privileged to be part of some gatherings around the country where leaders come together and Pete kind of leads some of those gatherings and Pete instilled to me again what credibly is in leadership.
And I mean that, he really did and he's modeled something from a distance
And he's just the way him and Sammy lead their lives.
They've got two amazing sons.
I want to know when I first kind of come into contact, I thought it was all a bit crazy.
But over the years, we've just grown to love this couple and their love for the world, their love for prayer.
You're going to catch that heart today.
And I believe there'll be something of seed sown in our church which will grow into something incredible over time.
And we love you.
Thanks for being obedient to his calling.
Thank you.
Would you put your hands together?
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
It's a joy to be with you.
Please do grab your seats.
Yeah, the feeling's a mutual.
Sam and I are so grateful for this church, for John Chantal.
You just give us hope, not just for Norwich and Norfolk, but for this nation, when we see what God is doing here, doing in soul church through you.
It is utterly inspiring.
And if it's your first time here, or you're watching online, these are good people.
They're not perfect, which is why you're fit right in.
But these are good people, people of integrity, people simply seeking to live for Jesus Christ in line with a 2,000 year old tradition as part of a 2.4 billion strong community called the church.
The church, Jesus Christ,
is the largest gathering of people on earth and we come together to fight injustice, to kick the hell out of injustice, to proclaim the good news there is a God who loves you and forgive one another and to raise our kids well and to be true to our covenant promises and a carefully environment and we are people of hope.
in a hopeless world.
And so when a church gets planted in your community, it's good news.
When a Christian moves in next door, it's good news.
When you hire a Christian, it's good news because Jesus Christ is the old summer good news in our world.
So you're very welcome.
Nice to be here.
I'm here with my wife, Sammy.
He gives a wave, Sammy.
There she is.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Any users of our daily devotional app, Lectio365, here, raise your hands.
Okay, if someone knew you just raised their hand, it's a weird thing, but they are actually psychologically primed to fall asleep to the sound of my voice.
So just, if they drop off, give them a good old nudge during the talk.
Last week, John spoke powerfully and brilliantly, calling this church in 2026 to be a people on mission.
He spoke from Matthew 28, the great commission where Jesus sends us into all the world to share the good news of his coming.
And it is just remarkable to see what God is doing through the mission of this
church.
I gather that you are in the middle of your biggest alpha course yet with 103 people going through that journey, discovering that you don't have to kiss your brains.
Goodbye to believe this stuff and getting to just ask questions in a non-judgmental space.
And of course, many people come to faith.
Millions actually have come to faith through alpha around the world.
And you know what's quite cool?
We've often found our church.
Some people come through alpha, and at the start, they think you have to be insane to believe this stuff.
They don't become Christians, but by the end, they are full of respect for Christians.
And so it's the most amazing journey.
It's not just that you've got your biggest alpha yet.
Tonight, I know every month you baptize people tonight.
In that paddling pool there, we'll be baptizing 36 people.
Isn't that amazing?
And I was in a meeting earlier where they're just casually planning the logistics for the day.
And they said, OK, enough already.
We cannot allow any more people to get baptized tonight.
They're going to have to wait for a month.
It's just who thinks that's a good problem for a church out of here.
And this is a church that's feeding the hungry.
Amazing to see your supermarket there.
John told me there are more people that come into this building in the week than on a Sunday, and it's packed out on a Sunday.
This is an amazing story.
I'm told that you can't fit everyone in to the room for your Bible studies that you hold here.
By the way, that is part of a global trend.
Fascination with the Bible is just rocketing in the Western worlds.
In America in 2024, they broke all records in terms of Bible sales, 2024.
And then last year, 2025, that record got broken again because Bible sales grew another 11%.
And this is in a world where book sales generally are flat lining or declining.
Meanwhile, in France, book sellers say they are in the middle of what they call a boom bibliique.
I think you can work out what that means.
And then here in the UK, for once, we're beating the Americans.
Listen, listen, listen to this.
134% rise in Bible cells since 2019.
134%.
And the booksellers say this.
This made me laugh when I read it.
They said, this spike in Bible cells seems to be driven by, listen,
first time buyers.
You understand what that means, right?
There is a new spiritual hunger in the land.
It's not hype.
It's not urban myth.
We have empirical evidence, statistical proof.
And many of you have got your own stories in the first service.
Number of people gave their lives to the Lord.
A number of you are going to be given the opportunity to respond to Jesus Christ and begin a relationship with the God you probably already believe in.
You can know him.
You are designed to walk and talk with life.
You wonder why your life doesn't sometimes quite seem to be working the way you feel it should because you were designed to do it with God, not kind of alongside or in spite of God.
And so when you get
way, move out of the rubbish and just come into relationship with God.
You're already talked in but grow in that conversation.
You find why you are alive on this planet and how to just navigate this bewildering thing we call life.
Last Sunday, obviously the starting gun was fired and this church now is officially on the mission.
John said, we're not just gathering, we are going.
I can hear John saying yes to his own message there.
That's a good sign, isn't it?
It was awesome last week, wasn't it, John?
How to make a British person conflicted.
If he was from America, he'd be like, hey, man, brother.
And so I can't think of a better way of following on
from a message about being on mission, then to speak with you today about the key to it all, the secret source behind our power as Christians, the fuel for the fire and the single greatest calling on every single one of us who call ourselves Christians, which is the invitation to intimacy with God
through the priority and the power of prayer.
John spoke last week on the great commission.
I want to speak today about the great omission, i.e.
the bit that we're not careful, we miss from the great commission.
And that is prayer, the way that we sometimes say, we've got to do all this stuff for God, preach the gospel, plant churches, and we end up trusting in programs and projects and products and personalities.
And we lacked the power of the Holy Spirit because we have ignored the priority of prayer at the heart of the mission.
Prayer is the ignition for the mission.
You know that thing?
Do you remember when you were little and you unwrapped a Christmas present and it was just some awesome battery powered toy?
I think especially little boys, they love a battery powered toy.
But your parents
have committed the ultimate error.
And they've forgotten to unwrap it before and to carefully put the batteries in.
And so you get, and then it does nothing.
It goes nowhere.
It looks good.
It's full of potential, but there is no power.
So often we look good.
We're full of good intentions.
We're full of potential, but there is a lack of power and the power comes.
from prayer.
So if you're able to do so, would you stand, please, out of reverence for the reading of God's Word in Holy Scripture?
I'm going to read it to you.
But this is from Acts chapter 1, starting at verse 4.
On one occasion, whilst he was eating with them, Jesus gave them this commandment.
Here, this is a commandment.
Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift, my Father promised, which you have heard me speak about.
For John,
baptized with water, but in a few days you'll be baptized with the Holy Spirit.
And then they gathered around him.
They asked him, Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel?
And he said to them, it's not for you to know the times or dates the Father has set by his own authority, but you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you.
And you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the very ends of the earth.
And after he said this, he was taken up before their eyes, and a cloud hid him from their sight.
And then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the hill called the Mount of Olives, a Sabbath day walk from the city.
And when they arrived, they went upstairs to the room where they were staying, and they all joined together constantly in prayer, 24-7 prayer, along with the women and Mary, the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.
Oh man, thanks be to God, please be seated.
Jesus says, you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and Judea and Samaria and the ends of the earth.
You imagine concentric circles.
He's echoing what he had said in the Great Commission.
You know, you're going to all the world, make disciples of all night nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, the Holy Spirit.
You're baptized into family and community, and teaching them to obey everything I've commanded, not just teaching them, everything I command them, lots of head knowledge, teach them a new life, start teaching to obey everything I've commanded, and I will be with you always at the very end of the age.
And here now, in his very last words, before he ascends to heaven, he says, you are going to be my witnesses, here in your hometown,
and in the nation and in the nations of the earth.
As followers of Christ, we are not just called, we are commanders.
Hear the force of that to be on mission, to be on mission where we live.
Do you know the house you live in, the family you were born into, the street you live in, the workplace that you're at?
It's not random.
You're not just, oh, well, I guess I'm here, so I'll try and be a Christian.
You have been placed there as a pastor and a prophet and a teacher and a post in that context.
You say to me, you don't know how hard it is to be a follower of Jesus in my workplace.
I'm the only Christian.
I said to you, thank God you're there.
Because who else is going to pray for them?
Who else is going to tell them about Jesus Christ?
If you're not there, do you understand the mission feel this hard?
Why is it so good here on a Sunday?
Because it's so hard out there.
But remember, we are here not just to gather, but to go.
You're a priest.
You're the one who's there to pull the very perps of God into that situation through prayer and proclamation.
Soul Church, we are cheering you on.
as you take the mandate of Jesus Christ himself seriously this year.
Do you know, Norfolk has 650 medieval churches.
I'm sure you see them all the time.
Most of them empty.
You have more medieval churches than anywhere else in the world.
Well done.
Good for you.
But sadly, the 2011 census dubbed Norwich the most godless
silly in the UK.
It's possible to have the outward form of religion and have no life.
What I see here is life.
Do you know, 65.4% of people in Norfolk no longer call themselves Christian?
More than 90% of people in Norwich are nowhere near a church on Sunday today.
Thank God that that
Those statistics are changing and we can see it.
We can see it here in this church and other churches in this region.
Thank God for salvation every week here at Soul Church.
Thank God that there are baptisms every month here.
Thank God that you're a church on mission.
Soul Church, you are defined, not by who is in here, but
by who is out there.
You are defined not by your seating capacity, but by your sending capacity.
You're defined not by the value of your brand, but the cost of your love.
You're defined not by the great story of your building, but by the story of what you are building in the lives of the poor and the lost to have no idea about Jesus Christ.
When people say to you, tell me about soul church, don't you dare tell them about this building, or let's recall building.
Tell them about caring for the poor, tell them about preaching the gospel, tell them about baptisms, tell them about families getting restored, because I'm not sure God recognizes our brands and our buildings, but you better believe he sees it when for all eternity.
Someone's life is changed.
Their sins are forgiven.
And he says, thank God, I gave my life for them.
Amen.
That's what you're building.
It's who you are.
We need you to stay focused.
Do you know, a few years ago, a number of years ago now, I went on holiday with a bunch of lads.
It was kind of a classic lads holiday.
There was a lot of mucking about.
And we went to a place called Annessy, which is on the border between Switzerland and France.
And there's a big lake in Annessy.
And we decided to take out peddle-o boats on the lake.
Just raise your hand if you've ever been having a peddle-o boat before.
Keep your hand up, it was the most exciting thing that you ever did.
It's like, you always thought, this is cool, we're going to go and peddle a boat.
And then you're like, oh my giddy on.
I've got to spend half an hour peddling this primary colored plastic toy with a wet bottom.
You know, it's just like.
We had a fleet of Pedro boats.
We did what all British people like to do when they go abroad, which is to launch a naval battle.
And we started attacking each other.
It got very out of hand.
And we ended up diving fully clothed into Lake Annessy and attacking each other.
And Swiss French people were standing around on the bank looking shocked, trying to make peace, eating chocolate, mending their watches.
quietly yodeling to themselves and so we swim ashore pulling out peddlers behind us and I realize we've got to do that thing we've got to get changed in public you know you get taught don't you as kids you get taught you wrap the towel around you it's very tricky actually and you drop your wet things you get your dry things on I'm pretty good at getting dressed most most days I'm fairly successful at getting dressed
But the moment I try and do it in public with a tower on my middle, and by the way, it must be even trickier for women.
If you need that, explain, go and talk to the pastor afterwards.
But the moment I try and do it with a tower on my middle, what happens is this, my big toe suddenly becomes enormous, and my pants get stuck on it, and you end up hopping around.
I don't know what that is.
In the morning in my bedroom, I just slipped my pants on and off.
And so I'm thinking, this isn't going to go well if I try and do this.
I know my friends will try and pull the towel away.
It's just inevitable.
So I think I'm going to find a toilet to go and get changed.
Raise your hands if you have actually been in a French toilet before, a public toilet front.
Keep your hand if it's the best toilet you've ever visited.
The French public toys are not good.
I wasn't looking forward to having to use those facilities.
Anyway, I went back to the car which was parked below ground level in a multi-storey car park.
And I got my dry clothes and I followed the signs to lay twalet.
Yeah, I am a linguist.
And they took me to some lift doors.
Do you ever like
Do you sometimes do things in your brain is like, what are you doing?
But your brain's moving slower than your body.
I'm not looking forward to the toilet.
The doors open in front of me.
And I see in front of me up just a perfect, clean, empty, warm, carpeted, pristine elevator.
And this thought comes into my head.
I'm sure I can get changed before I reach the next floor.
It seemed quite logical to me at the time.
It's actually a classic guy thinking, yeah, I can do that.
So, I mean, I know if any of you in there, you've got pieces of really bad idea.
Do not take your clothes off in there, you know.
But as soon as the doors shut behind me, I sort of found myself pulling down my wet trousers and pants.
I'd just grabbed my dry pants.
They'd just got caught on my enormous big toe.
I'm dancing around like,
rumple stiltskin in the nudes, and the whole lift went light.
And I found out that I was in a glass elevator, which was the centerpiece of a French shopping centre.
There's all these women going, oh la la!
Absolutely true.
thought, I managed to escape without getting arrested.
Listen, it's a little picture of what a mess we can easily get into when we're just frantically, frenetically reacting to anxiety and sort of not thinking clearly.
And we just end up thinking, how did I get here in life in so many different ways?
It's easy to make bad decisions when we're just frantically reacting to circumstance, when we're just fielding everything that life throws at us.
And it's essential, especially at the start of a new year, not just as a church to say, where are we going and what are we doing, but in our own lives individually, what are my four, how am I gonna live intentionally this year?
How am I gonna make sure that Christ's priorities are mine?
this year.
Living on mission means staying ruthlessly focused.
You know the Archbishop William Temple, former Archbishop William Temple said, the church is the only society on earth that exists for the benefit of its non-members.
That's exactly what I hear Pastor John saying.
Soul Church, you exist for the benefit
of your non-members.
If we're going to bring our lives into alignment with the priorities of Christ, we will be focused on the lost, because Jesus was most certainly on mission.
But here is the strange thing, because his heart is for the lost, because his heart is on mission.
We understand perfectly when in the great commission, he says, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go into all the world, go.
But then here in the passage we'll read today, he goes, but stay, stay, stay.
Don't go yet.
Wait in Jerusalem.
And they do, they wait and they push into prayer.
And then the spirit of God comes and 3000 are baptized in a single day.
The ignition for the mission.
Jesus realized it's not enough just to give you the commission because otherwise there can be a terrible omission.
We try and do God's work in our way, God's mission without God's presence and power in our lives.
And so he calls us to go, but also to stay and pause and pray.
That's my story.
We were, Samuel, I were busy planting churches.
We've been doing that for 30 years now.
We've tried to live our lives on mission, I suppose.
But many years ago now, in the summer of 1999, actually, this frustration began to grow in me.
And I found myself just thinking, I need to know Jesus more than I do.
Things were going well outwardly.
The church was growing.
People from completely non-church backgrounds were coming to know Christ.
It was very innovative.
We had DJs leading worship.
I was being interviewed on the radio, BBC and all that stuff.
But inwardly, something was dying.
And I was aware that, you know, we were high on program, high on vision, but very shallow on our spirituality as a church.
And I was also aware, can I be really honest, that I myself
talked more about Jesus in public than I talked with him in private.
Ow.
And there's that bit, isn't there, where Jesus says on the last day, many, many will say, look at all the cool stuff we did for you, Jesus.
And Jesus will apply, yeah, but we never knew each other.
I never knew you.
And I was, I was worried I was going to be that guy.
Look, I planted churches for you.
I preached for you.
I wrote books for you and hit me like, yeah, great.
Thanks so much, you know.
but we never knew each other.
Why are you telling everyone else's stories?
Why are you not pushing into my presence in prayer for yourself?
And so we realized everything comes back to prayer, that it's not enough just to go, go, go.
If we don't learn to stay, stay, stay and pray.
And so we started the first prayer room, not trying to start a movement just because we wanted to learn how to pray.
And then when we did,
the presence of God just came into that prayer room.
We prayed night and day, first of all for a month.
And that was unthinkable for us because we were only getting seven old ladies in a goat to our church prayer meeting before this.
The goat wasn't committed in any way at all.
And suddenly we found ourselves, we prayed night and day in this room, prayer room, like your chapel here, for a month.
At the end of the month, we couldn't stop because it was too wonderful.
too many miracles were starting to happen, that could not happen through a church meeting or through a preach.
There were angelic visitations in the prayer room.
Word got out.
Have you heard this angels in the prayer room?
And suddenly there was a bunch of people saying, oh, I've got to get in the prayer room.
That's pretty cool.
And I was going, I'm not going near that prayer room.
I remember these two atheists came to check out the prayer room.
They came because they were
studying religious education, I think, on their teacher training course.
So it was like an interesting place to go.
And they, they, they, it was the prayer and they said, wow, you can really actually feel God in here, can't you?
So I'm like, mm-hmm.
See here, they said, cool.
And then I said, but you don't really believe in God, do you?
They said, no, we don't.
But you can feel Him here, can't you?
These people.
And I tell you what else in our prayer room was, we started to see the lament, the pain in any community, the heartbreak.
And people started to write their prayers on the walls and floor and ceiling.
And you realized the miracles that were happening, but also the agony that people are bringing to God in prayer.
You know, that's what the book of Psalms, at least half of the Psalms isn't happy clappy.
It's the blues.
It's God, where are you?
Why am I suffering?
Why am I hurting like hell?
And so all this amazing stuff started to happen as we began to push into prayer.
And we just couldn't stop.
We've now been praying nonstop since the 5th of September, 1999.
And we're now in almost every nation on Earth.
It's been an amazing ride.
And yeah, glory to God.
And here's the thing, you know, I get stories all the time of the most incredible answered prayers.
But let me tell you one, because it relates to this thing about the relationship between prayer and mission.
I heard from some guys who were running a prayer room in Uganda.
And one of them was in the prayer room one night, and God gave him a word, literally a word.
He didn't know what it meant.
The word was this, kakanga, K-A-C-U-N-G-A, kakanga.
So he did what any of us would do.
He Googled it.
And he found out Kacunga is one of the many, many islands that are situated on Lake Victoria at the heart of Uganda.
And this whole act is like a massive inland sea.
There are 3,000 islands.
Kacunga is just one of them.
And so they thought, well, we better go.
We don't know why, but God's made us aware of this place.
So they drove for many hours and they charged the boat and they managed to find Kacunga.
So he turned up and they found a community of subsistence fishermen.
There was a hospital, no school, no electricity on the island, very primitive.
And they'd never heard the name of Jesus.
So the people on the island were quite surprised to see these sophisticated people from the capital city had suddenly turned up on their island.
They weren't used to this.
They were, why are you here?
And they said, oh, well, the living God gave us the name of your island and sent us to you.
And so the islands, of course, it will tell us about this God.
And they told them about Jesus Christ.
They preached the gospel.
First time it ever happened on that island.
And that very day, 50 people on that island gave their life to Jesus Christ.
A church planted in a day because God's people had pushed into prayer.
See, the first call upon you is not to the lost, but it's to the Lord.
And when you focus on the Lord, what you'll find is that His focus is on the lost.
And so prayer and mission kind of go together.
The things that are breaking His heart start to catch your heart too.
When those first disciples push into the prayer room, they weren't hiding from the world as such.
The Spirit of God came and pushed them out into the street to preach the gospel.
Isaiah, chapter 6, is like, suddenly finds himself in the very courts of heaven, and there's like angels and seraphim and all these kind of world, Harry Potter style, angelic beings, and there's smoke, and everyone, you know, the seraphim are saying, holy, holy, holy is the Lord, and Isaiah is knees and knocking.
He says, whoa, to me, I'm a man of unclean lips, and I live amongst the people of unclean lips, and my eyes have seen the king.
Wow.
But here's the interesting thing.
God, when Isaiah sees him, is not staring in a mirror going, yeah, I am pretty fantastic.
Thank you for the worship.
He sees the living God in this awesome environment, and God is looking out the window at the earth.
His heartbreaking saying, who can I send?
Who will go?
And Isaiah goes, here I am, send me.
You push, your job is to focus on the Lord.
And the Lord will then focus you on the lost.
Does that make sense?
That's the story of this church.
Pushing in the prayer, and then it becomes something real, like this building, for example.
If you read the book of Acts, you'll see the mission of God continually advances on two legs, the body of Christ, as it were, walks on two legs, proclamation of the gospel.
and prayer.
Proclamation of the gospel and prayer.
If you're just trying to do mission without prayer, you're hopping.
You ain't gonna go very far.
You'll be lucky to get out of Jerusalem, let alone to the ends of the earth hopping.
You're gonna end up getting some appalling damage to your muscles and you're gonna fall over eventually.
You're just hopping around.
You need both legs working prayer and mission, mission and prayer.
And then the body of Christ is gonna move.
Let me demonstrate this to you.
I'm gonna go through very, very quickly.
And I could do this in much greater depth, but I'd be laboring the point.
But look at this, first of all, on one hand, look at the momentum of the mission of the early church.
Last week, Matthew 28, 19, go and make disciples of all nations.
Bang, you know, this is the starting gun.
Acts 2, 41, about 3,000 were added to their number.
Acts 2, 47, and the Lord added to their number daily.
Acts 6 verse 7, the number of disciples increased rapidly.
Acts 11 verse 1, the Gentiles received the word of God.
Acts 12, 24, the word of God continued to spread.
It just goes on and on.
You get this feeling of just this unbelievable momentum.
But in between every single one of those passages, I've just cited what you find is the people of God pushing into prayer every single time.
So it goes like this, Acts 1 verse 4.
Jesus, having said go, says, wait and pray.
We just studied that and therefore in Acts 1, 14 they all joined together constantly in prayer.
Acts 2, 42, they devoted themselves to prayer.
Suddenly they are leading a church of many thousands and the apostles say, we're not gonna get drawn into admin and management.
Our job is to pray and to attend to the word.
It's four verse 31.
After they prayed,
The building shook and they spoke the word of God boldly.
Acts 10 verse 9, Peter went up on the roof to pray.
And that's the tipping point when the gospel starts to spread beyond the Jewish people into the Gentile world.
Acts 12 verse 5, Peter was in prison, but the church was earnestly praying.
The body of Christ has always marched on these two legs, prayer and proclamation, proclamation and prayer.
So church, you're going to be on mission this year, it will be
Proclamation of the good news of Jesus Christ and pushing into prayer is never before.
And you do that, the body of Christ is going places.
We see this throughout history.
You know, on the 31st of December, 1738, I don't know how you like to spend your New Year's Eve's, but John Wesley, a rather constipated Anglican clergyman in the 18th century, gathered his friends and said, let's pray in the new year.
And they prayed right the way through midnight.
didn't watch Jules Holland.
And they're praying in Federal Lane London, just off Fleet Street.
And then we know, because Wesley wrote about it in his journal, he said, at three o'clock in the morning, he said, his majesty came.
His majesty came.
The power of the spirit came to that prayer room, and they all fell to the ground on the power of the Holy Spirit.
And then they got up and just were shot out like rockets.
You took about prayer, giving birth to mission.
And Wesley rode at least 125,000 miles preaching the gospel and turning the entire tide of British history.
Don't be impressed with Wesley, be impressed with the horse, by the way.
And that great awakening that began at that moment, out of that prayer room,
That's the beginning of the end of slavery in the British Empire.
That's the beginning of the first lending banks for the poor.
That's the beginning of free education for all, not in some government policy.
The government's only democracy.
They only have to do what we vote for.
The government is there following on our lead.
That's why what we need in this nation is a grassroots movement of the spirit that turns the hearts of the fathers to the sons and changes family trees.
And in time, our politicians will obediently follow on.
That's why it matters to vote.
Why we should pray for them?
Because most of them don't even know how to put Ikea furniture together.
Let alone how to rule a nation.
They need wisdom, greater their own wisdom.
That's why you need to look to the Lord of Lords, the King of Kings.
Don't be disillusioned and cynical about your politicians.
They're just us trying their best.
Pray for them.
But look to God for the solutions for this nation.
Amen.
And if you hear who are MPs or feel that call, it's a worthy and important call.
Let me encourage you.
having massively discouraged you.
I could go on, but we see again and again through history.
It's not just the launch of the church in a prayer room, but that when God's people push into prayer, mission is the result.
We're at the beginning, we think of a quiet revival.
The sorts of things that are happening here in soul church and in Norwich, we start to see all around the nation.
And you open this to the faith.
It's not just Bible cells that are going up.
But churches that are well-led and full of faith and are relational and not rude are basically seeing people come into faith in a new way.
And particularly young people, I'm particularly young men.
By the way, a few years ago, they were writing young men off.
They're sending them the first bunch of atheists and now they're leading the way back towards Jesus.
I believe you're at the start of something really exciting.
I don't think you're going to look back and say, we kind of peaked at the end of 2025.
We had like thousands of people at the wonder.
We had a really swanky building that was kind of full.
We kind of peaked.
I think what you're going to do is you're going to look back and say, you know, around 2026, that was a hell of a pregnancy.
But then the miracles started getting born.
Then we started seeing not just individual saved, but entire families saved.
We started to see transformation in society.
We started to see the marriage statistics change in Norwich.
We started to see missionaries shot out around the world.
It was unbelievable, all the ministries that started to be born because the Spirit of the Lord comes and brings creativity and imagination and courage and there's something entrepreneurial released when the Spirit of God moves.
See, it's not by might, not by power, but by my Spirit says the Lord.
Jesus says, the harvest is plentiful.
Therefore, you must ask the Father.
You understand?
Push into pray.
Mission isn't a technique.
It's not a strategy that you can work up by human effort.
It is an in-breaking of the kingdom of God that you can only pray down by His Spirit.
Soul Church, I believe, as you embark in a new way upon mission, that the Lord is calling you.
to light a furnace of prayer right at the heart of it, corporate and personal.
I believe the Lord Jesus Christ is calling you to be a house of prayer
for the nation and the nations.
I believe he is raising up intercessors, spiritual warriors, annas and simians, people of faith in your midst.
Everyone is called to the mission.
Everyone is called to pray, but some people, there's a particular calling upon them to push into God's presence in prayer, and you know who you are, and I want to stand here and bless you.
This is in the very DNA of this city, right?
I mean, 1096, Norwich Cathedral began as a house of prayer, a Benedictine monastery.
You know, and in the 11th century, this was one of the leading pilgrim destinations in all of Europe, this place here.
People came here to pray, this is in your DNA, right the way, that's true.
A 14th century Julian of Norwich, the first woman to write a book in the English language, your inheritance, you should walk tall and be proud of that.
And then you've got the great movement of the non-conformist slide in the 15th century.
I think it's 15th.
Thomas Billney, an extraordinary man who was born here in Norfolk, and said, no salvation comes through faith in Jesus Christ, not through works.
And for that, the bishop of Norwich had him killed at La Lads Pit, but he would not recant.
on what we all now know to be true.
And there was an incredible movement of law and arts and Quakers and non-conformist Christians here in this part of the world.
In fact, Norfolk gave more pilgrims to the Mayflower to go and help, as it were, found America as we now know it than any other place in the UK.
There was something that stirred in this part of the world.
And it's not just history, it's your DNA.
It's not like, oh, my DNA is just when that happened, but no, your DNA is your DNA is just who you are.
So, soul church, you're a house of prayer for the nations and you're a mission station for the whole region.
So I just wonder how this challenge makes you feel.
Maybe you're like, man, this is a bit heavy, the guy at the front yelling, I don't even know if I believe all this stuff.
Well, in a moment, there's going to be an opportunity for you to begin to discover not just a belief in God, but a walking, talking conversation or relationship with a God who knows you best and loves you most and wants to do life with you.
It'll change everything.
Prayer is conversation with God.
Or maybe some of you are feeling daunted because you're thinking, do you know what?
I used to push into prayer, but I had my heart broken.
I believed and believed and it didn't work.
And I've kind of downgraded my faith.
And all I want to say to you at the start of this year is, you know, when you're hurting, it's important to be honest about that, to lament, not to rush on, to feel the pain for a while, to find friends who'll sit with you in your pain and in your questions.
But eventually there comes a time where you have to draw a line and say, I will not allow the pain in my past to rob me.
of the destiny that God has for me.
And maybe, just maybe, I won't ever understand everything.
And I will even carry some questions even into heaven.
But I am determined to live by faith and to live with trust and proceed on that basis.
I suspect the first hundred years in heaven will be full of this sound.
Oh!
As people, oh, that's why.
That's what you would do.
And so maybe for some of us, this is just a call to pick up the mantle of prayer, a fresh.
Start small.
Don't try and jump to the top of the staircase all in one go.
What's the next step for you?
Maybe it's just a bit of post-it note on your mirror to pray for a particular friend every day when you're cleaning your teeth.
At the moment, you think that friend is never going to be interested in Jesus, but just maybe if you keep praying, you keep stacking dominoes, that they'll be sitting next to you at the wonder at the end of this year.
And you'll be quiet.
You'll be playing it cool, of course.
Hey, it's so nice to have you here, but you'll be insanely freaking out that they're in this building.
And you'll be thinking, they don't even know there's a post-it note on my mirror with their name on it.
I'll wait to break that to them until they get baptized.
Maybe it's forming a worship playlist that you just listen to around the house.
I wanna encourage you since it's completely free.
If you struggle with daily devotionals, just download our Lectio 365 app because literally hundreds of thousands of people use it and it helps you just 10 minutes, just press play.
I'll help you to walk with the Lord and talk with the Lord each day or I've written a book called How to Pray, which is available here that will help you to grow in just the simple things of prayer.
I'm going to finish with one last story.
It's this.
We have two sons.
And when they were very little, you know, kids get to that stage where they start to want to write, but they can't do it yet, you know that thing.
And so our youngest son, Danny, he was very, very cute.
He had sort of bleached, blonded hair.
And it used to, it was so fine.
It used to stick straight upright on end.
And he had these big eyes.
And he started trying to write, but all he could do was scribble.
But he thought he was writing, you know?
And one occasion he'd done all these scribbles in this bit of paper, and he came and handed it to me.
He said, Daddy, look what I write it.
So I took the bit of paper, and I did what you'd all do.
I went, this is unbelievable.
This is phenomenal writing.
Daddy, this is one of the greatest writing I've ever seen in my life.
This is like Shakespeare, well done, son.
You know, you're going to encourage them.
And then he said two words that struck absolute terror through me.
He said, read it.
I'm staring at the scribble.
There are no clues.
The greatest psychiatrist on earth couldn't read it.
So in despair, I look at his tiny little face staring off my mind and the strangest thing happened.
See, I'm his dad and I found I could read his face pretty easy.
that the weird little things that go on in his head, kind of how he's feeling.
I mean, don't be too impressed.
I could work out what he had for lunch because it was still on his t-shirt.
And so as I looked at him, I thought, I think I might know what he's trying to say.
So then I looked back at the scribbles and I cleared my throat and began to read.
And as I did so, this little head is nodding.
And at the end, he says, well done, Daddy.
Good reading.
And I said, thank you very much, because it was actually some of the greatest reading I'd ever done.
Here's the thing.
You think your prayer life is about having all the right words for God, but they're just scribbles.
They're just sounds that you emit into the ether.
He's your father in heaven, and he knows you better than anyone else.
And he understands the funny little things going on in your head and how you're feeling and what you had for lunch.
And so as you bring him your scribbles, your words, your silence, your tears, whatever it is, he looks at you and he reads you and he interprets the scribbles.
True to our own hearts.
You want proof this is exactly what Romans chapter eight says.
The spirit helps us in our weakness.
We do not know what we ought to pray for.
but the Spirit Himself intercedes for us through wordless grounds.
And He who searches our hearts and knows the mind of the Spirit because the Spirit intercedes for God's people in accordance with the will of God.
Isn't that beautiful?
The Father interprets your prayers.
And the Spirit of God Himself is praying.
We're told that He is
interceding in groans for you.
To be filled with the spirit is to be filled with a groaning and a praying spirit.
You wonder why sometimes being a Christian feels more like a groan than a happy sort of song, because the spirit is groaning for the world.
Sometimes in prayer you can't even use words, you just weep.
Sometimes in prayer it sounds like a blasphemy, you just think of how broken someone's life is and you just go, oh God.
Oh God, he interprets and understands.
And so I'd love just to pray for one or two people.
Because what I've shared with you today, this isn't really just a talk for me.
This is actually my life.
I was busy on mission.
Still am actually.
And then God came and intervened and hijacked me.
into the prayer room.
I was all go, go, go.
And he said, wait and learn to pray.
And I suspect there are people here.
You've got a sense that at the beginning of this year on mission, actually at the beginning of this life on mission, God is saying to you, you got to learn to pray.
Or it's all just going to be human effort.
And so for some, there's this invitation and for others,
As I intimated earlier, I know that you've been praying for many, many years.
Be faithful.
And maybe like Anna and Simeon, when they saw the baby Jesus in the temple, it wasn't what they'd been envisaging all those years, an incontinent, inarticulate child.
They'd been visiting a great, conquering Messiah for Israel.
But somehow they saw and knew this is the answer to all our prayers, and Simeon holds the baby and says,
Now I can die happy.
My prayers have been answered.
And so at the start of this quiet revival, you're starting to see even in this church.
I know some of you here, your Anna's and Simeon's God's brought you here because you've seen you life here.
Is this your cultural preference?
No, but you know you want to be where there's something being born by the Spirit of God and you can see it in all its mess and all its miraculous power here.
And so maybe whether you're at the start of your journey in prayer or whether you've been praying many years, or maybe like I said earlier, you've been, you realize you've downgraded prayer.
You've downgraded faith actually because you've got your heart broken and you just sense the start of this year, it's time to draw a line and say, I'm not gonna allow the pain in my past to hold me back from what God has for me in his mission in the future.
And so I'd like to pray for you as an impartation, like from my own heart to yours.
You'll only remember some of what I say.
Probably the only thing you remember is about being naked in the lift.
It's depressing.
It's not an image I encourage you to cherish.
But when we pray something can get imparted that isn't just to the head, but it's actually transformational for your life.
And so I want to just pray for you.
I don't know when I'll get to be back with you again.
I hope it's soon.
But even if it's a long time, I want to leave something with those of you that God is speaking to about prayer.
Because if soul church can be a house of prayer for the nations, it isn't going to be like a spaceship that just lands in the parking lot.
It's going to be individuals here rising up and growing, learning how to move the hand of God through the power of prayer in the private place.
So I don't want anyone to feel pressured.
This definitely isn't for everyone here.
But if you're here going, this wasn't just a message for me.
This was specific.
I know God has called me into prayer.
I know that God has called me to pick up the mantle of prayer.
I don't have all the answer.
I want to grow in this.
If it's new to you, if your heart's been broken or you're anor and simian, I'd love you just to stand now because I want to just pray for you, just wherever you are.
The men and women,
that God is raising up to pray, to pray for the university campuses here, to pray for particular sectors and workplaces, to pray for the football team.
As someone here, there's a calling on you to particularly pray into families and marriages.
I don't know if I've ever said this before, I sense that someone hears a call upon you, it's a deep burden even out of your own story.
to pray and to intercede for marriages and for parenting.
And it's like a particular call in someone here.
But I wonder if those of you standing, would you mind just maybe put a hand on your heart or open your hands to receive?
However, you can best pray with your body right now.
And the rest of you, those who are sitting, there is someone standing near you.
Would you just stretch their hands or something?
Because you have a vested interest.
If these men and women push into prayer the way I think they're going to, it's going to raise the sea level for everybody.
You sir, in the orange baseball cap, there is an anointing on you to change the destiny of entire families.
And I see you particularly praying with and for men.
And I see something incredibly powerful being born through you in the realm of mobilizing prayer amongst men and for men.
One of the great battles of this moment is around fatherhood.
You know that in your own story.
It is around friendship.
It is around the loneliness that many men experience.
And one of the stories they will tell of Norwich is that something happened here that particularly impacted men and that went on to particularly impact more families than anyone, and more workplace than anyone could imagine.
I think there's an anointing on you.
This isn't just a nice idea.
There's an anointing on you to imagine and to push into that and to attend to that in your own life and then to really build and grow out from that.
Anyway, let's all just hold our hands out and let's pray.
Lord Jesus, I pray that the very prayer meeting of heaven would come and fill our lives.
We pray, Spirit of God, you who intercede in groans that you would come and fill our lives with the groan, the longing of heaven, for the brokenness of the world to be healed.
We pray, Lord, the things that break your heart will begin to break our hearts.
We ask that you would deliver us from complacency and apathy and unbelief and that you would help us to be men and women who walk known in the Spirit of God, known by the angelic realm, known even in the demonic realm, that we would be
men and women who walk with authority that I yes would be yes and no would be no that we learn how to bind in heaven and bind on earth that we would be people who shape destinies through the decisions that we make and the postures that we adopt and so Lord I want to pray you're anointing upon all these standing that they would see we pray for a lease of dreams and visions and prophetic insight in this church in an extraordinary way we pray Lord
God that you would help us to see what you're doing and to join in.
And so, Lord, would you establish a house of prayer for all nations in this place.
In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
I want to just pray for one more group of people.
I don't know your story.
I don't know what brought you here today, but God does.
And He loves every person in this room.
You know, Pete said this thing in a story, he said that when he met with this gentleman, he said, I feel God, but I don't believe in God.
Do you know how many people come into this place and say this?
I can feel something different here.
What you're feeling is the presence of Jesus.
You might not believe in Christ, but he is true.
He is the way and he leads to life.
And if you're standing here today and said, I've never even considered that God could be real, but you can feel something different.
This isn't a positive vibe you're feeling here today.
What you're feeling is Jesus.
And he's drawn close to you in this place, and he wants a relationship with you.
He loves you, my friend.
He knows everything about you.
He knows every thought you've ever had, yet he still loves you.
Can you imagine if anyone knew every thought or every action we'd ever done and still loved us?
God does.
And he sent his one and only son, Jesus, to this earth to die for you.
His will is that none would perish, but all would have everlasting life.
And right now, I want to give you an opportunity to receive Jesus as your personal Savior.
Maybe you think I'm not good enough to receive Jesus.
You're in great company.
None of us are good enough.
We've all messed up.
The Bible says we've all fallen short of the glory of God.
It's not about what we've done right or what we've done wrong.
It's about what God did right in sending His Son Jesus to this earth.
He was the ultimate sacrifice for our sins.
So today, I'm going to ask you one question.
Do you know Jesus as your personal Savior?
And if you can't honestly say you do, I want to say a prayer.
And this prayer is going to connect you to God through Jesus.
He's going to come into your heart and forgive you.
Forgive you of every sin.
He's going to give you a brand new start from this day forth.
The first of February can be a life changing date in your calendar.
So this is the question, do you know Jesus today?
If you're saying, I once did, but I've walked away today, you can come back home.
You can come home.
This is your home.
You can feel the love of Christ welcoming you home.
So from the floor, the tears sitting, everyone watching online, I'm going to count to three.
If you say I'm three, I need Jesus in my life.
I need Him to come and forgive me and give me a brand new stuff.
Right now, all I want you to do is just snip up your hand long enough and high enough so I can see it because I want to pray for you.
One, He loves you.
to have the courage right now to respond to His love.
Three, just slip up your hand all over this room.
Say, I need Jesus today.
I need Him to come in.
God bless you.
Just lift it up nice and high.
Over this side, anyone to say, I need Jesus today.
Owner of Sea Jesus, God bless you.
All right, you can put your hands down.
We're going to say this prayer out loud together.
Dear Lord Jesus, thank you for dying for me to forgive all my sins and failures.
I believe that you rose from the dead so that I can have a brand new life.
Please come into my heart and help me by the power of the Holy Spirit to trust and to live for you.
Amen.
Come on, let's congratulate everyone who said that prayer.
Just slip up your hand one more time.
If you said that prayer right now, just slip up your hand.
If you said that prayer, lift it up nice and high, lift it up nice and high.
All over this room, you said that prayer.
Lift it up nice and high, you said that prayer.
Here's what I want us to do.
If you lifted up that hand, I want you to come down because I want to shake your hand and congratulate you.
So if you lifted up your hand, step away from your seat.
You come right now.
You come.
You come if you said that prayer.
Come on, you come.
Come to Jesus.
You come.
Beautiful.
Come on, you come.
Bring a prayer.
I know we've already said a prayer, but I want to pray a specific prayer for you.
because I know it took a lot of courage to step out of that seat.
I don't know your story, but God does.
I don't know what brought you to this place, but God does.
And he's got you.
And he's gonna help you through these next few days and weeks with the challenges in your life.
And so Father, I thank you for every single child, mom, dad, individual who's made a decision today.
I pray that they would walk with you.
They would treasure you.
You would help them, Father God, every day of their life.
Even the moments they don't understand you would draw close to them, Father.
I thank you that the 1st of February is a life-changing date.
In Jesus' name.
Amen.
This is Annie just here.
Give us a wave, Annie.
We're going to give you a little gift.
It's a Bible, OK?
So we've got a little quiet chap.
We're going to give you the Bible, give you some next steps, and then you're going to jump straight back.
But I'm also going to come off the stage and shake your hand.
Is that all right?
Because I want to congratulate you on this incredible decision.
So head this way with me.
Thanks again for tuning in.
If you said yes to Jesus today by saying the Salvation Prayer, we'd love for you to email connections at soulchurch.com, so we can talk to you a little bit more about this incredible decision you've just made.
And if at any point in the service, you felt moved to give towards any of our local or global initiatives, head to soulchurch.com.
And don't forget to stay connected with us on Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube by searching at Soul Church UK.
Take care and God bless.